---
layout: default
title: Introduction
permalink: /introduction/
group: base
anchors:
  Cryptocurrency Basics: cryptocurrency-basics
  What Makes Cardano SL Special?: what-makes-cardano-sl-special
  Beyond Settlement Layer: beyond-settlement-layer
---

[//]: # (Reviewed at 60033350e60408fc79f202491e6985b3b47acd90)

Dear reader, the purpose of this documentation is to provide you with
understanding of the first layer of Cardano Platform stack — the Settlement
Layer. If you have an understanding of what Settlement Layer is, we suggest you
reading the [Differences Between the Paper and the
Implementation](/cardano/differences/) article, moving on to the [documentation
on protocols and implementation](/protocols/csl-application-level/).

This documentation is targeting IOHK developers, third-party software
developers, auditors, and consultants who are collaborating on implementing
Cardano Settlement Layer or using Cardano Settlement Layer reference
implementation.

Cardano SL (or Cardano Settlement Layer) is a cryptographic currency designed
and developed by [IOHK](https://iohk.io/team). You can think of this product as
Bitcoin reimagined with a freedom to fix Bitcoin’s design flaws. For those who
don’t know what Bitcoin is, in the [next section](#cryptocurrency-basics) we’ll
talk a little bit about what a cryptocurrency is and why do cryptocurrencies
matter. If you have basic understanding of Bitcoin, you may
[skip](#what-makes-cardano-sl-special) the next section. If you’re eager to
start working with Cardano SL, refer to [Installation Guide]() and [Wallet
Operation Guide]() to get started.

## Cryptocurrency Basics

Before giving a definition of a cryptocurrency, let’s talk about why we care
about digital currencies in general and cryptographic currencies in particular.

### Why Do We Care?

#### Speed

As opposed to conventional (also known as fiat), centrally banked currencies
such as the Yen or the American Dollar, digital currencies do not require a
banking system to move value. With this restriction lifted, working with digital
currencies is much faster than working with banking, especially on a global
scale. The transfer of 10 USD from Osaka to Denver no longer takes days when a
digital currency is used. All transactions are made rapidly regardless of the
distance. The transfer also follows the same understandable rules within a
predictable amount of time, ensuring speed and reliability.

#### You Own Your Money

All that a commercial bank account owner is given is a promise of being paid a
certain amount of money within a reasonable amount of time after receiving a
payout request. Banking systems also have limits to any volume of value being
moved, rendering an individual unable to withdraw or transfer large amounts
quickly. In case of cryptocurrencies, the person who holds a special kind of
information called *a secret key* can spend the money at will. No other entity
has a power to manipulate the value that a user owns.

#### Pseudonymity

One can have as many cryptocurrency addresses as they wish, receiving and
spending money from different addresses as per their purpose. A merchant running
an E-Commerce shop can have a set of addresses to receive money and issue
refunds, and a personal “wallet” for their own needs. A single interface is used
to control all of these wallets, and there is no need to log in to several
payment platforms, which makes the process very time efficient.

#### Security

Your money is as secure as the *secret key* that allows spending it. That means
that storing your secret key in a safe on a laptop disconnected from the
Internet is equivalent to having banknotes in a password-protected lockbox in a
safe. Absolutely nobody can steal this money even by carrying out a successful
cyber-attack.

#### Extensibility

Using an approach known as [*side chains*](), general-purpose cryptocurrencies
such as Cardano SL or Bitcoin can enable domain-specific cryptocurrencies, such
as Ethereum Classic. This way, any innovation developed via domain-specific
cryptocurrency can have participants who hold value in a general-purpose
cryptocurrency. Examples of such applications are identity management, gaming
and gambling, and verifiable computations.

### What is a Cryptocurrency?

Cryptocurrency is a form of digital currency that uses cryptography to
manipulate value. Cryptography provides a way to generate proof of genuine
authenticity of any kind of information. This is called *digital signing*. In
cryptocurrencies we generate a ledger (a database which provides information on
how much money each address has) by signing and sending transactions to the
network and receiving blocks of confirmed transactions. Cryptocurrencies are
normally decentralized, meaning that many people from all over the globe
participate in ledger generation by running cryptocurrency nodes. Thus, a
consensus about the state of the ledger has to be achieved. Two most significant
approaches for achieving such consensus are discussed in the next section.

## What Makes Cardano SL Special?

[//]: # (v0.1.0.0)

While there are similarities between Bitcoin and Cardano SL, there are also many
differences between these two cryptocurrencies. The most significant difference
is that Bitcoin is a Proof of Work type cryptocurrency, while Cardano SL makes
use of a Proof of Stake approach to reach consensus. This encourages honesty and
long-term participation.

### Purpose of a Consensus Algorithm

Consensus algorithms are used to produce new transaction blocks, resulting in an
updated state of the ledger. Whenever someone publishes a block of transactions,
they — or rather, their node that runs the cryptocurrency protocol — have to
attach a proof that they have merited it. Below two types of such proofs are
discussed.

### Proof of Work and Mining

Proof of Work is the most common consensus algorithm type for cryptocurrencies.
It originated in Bitcoin, and this is how this cryptocurrency works. To generate
Proof of Work, a computer has to solve a challenge. The challenge is a
computationally heavy problem which is hard to solve, but the solution is easy
to verify. When a computer on a Proof of Work based network finds a solution, it
publishes it along with the transactions that the computer observed while
cracking the problem. The owner of this computer collects the transaction fees
and a reward for generating a block. The entire process is called *mining*.
Mining is very energy-consuming and its increase is analogous to
competitiveness.

### Proof of Stake and Minting

Proof of Stake is a novel approach to block generation. IOHK scientists led by
[Prof. Aggelos Kiayias](https://iohk.io/team/aggelos-kiayias/) have designed the
first provably secure proof of stake algorithm called Ouroboros. Ouroboros lies
at the heart of Cardano SL. Research team has published a
[whitepaper](https://iohk.io/research/papers/a-provably-secure-proof-of-stake-blockchain-protocol/)
which is a worthy read for anyone with a background in cryptocurrency theory.
The core idea of Proof of Stake is that instead of wasting electricity on
cracking computationally heavy problems, a node is selected to mint a new block,
with a probability proportional to the amount of coins a particular node has. A
node that attempts to generate a block is called *a stakeholder*. You can read
more about this process in [Proof of Stake in Cardano
SL](/cardano/proof-of-stake/).

## Beyond Settlement Layer

[//]: # (<2017-02-20>)

Cardano SL is called a “Layer” for a reason. It’s the first component of the
Cardano Platform. Eventually it will be expanded with a Control Layer, serving
as a trusted computation framework to evaluate a special kind of proofs to
ensure that a certain computation was carried out correctly. In gaming and
gambling, such systems are useful for verifying honesty of random number
generation and game outcomes. Accompanied with [side chains]() it will make
possible to accomplish such tasks as provably fair distribution of winnings in
games. The application of Control Layer lies well beyond gaming and gambling.
Identity management, credit system and more will be a part of Cardano Platform.
We are also aiming to evolve Cardano SL wallet program called [Daedalus]() into
a universal cryptocurrency wallet featuring automated cryptocurrency trading and
cryptocurrency-to-fiat transactions.
