---
layout: default
title: Glossary
permalink: /glossary/
group: base
anchors:
  Core Concepts: core-concepts
  Protocol Basics: protocol-basics
---

[//]: # (Reviewed at 60033350e60408fc79f202491e6985b3b47acd90)

# Glossary

Glossary of terms related to Cardano SL.

## Core Concepts

### Cryptocurrency

A computer system which uses cryptographic protocols to generate a ledger.

### Cardano SL

A hybrid decentralized cryptocurrency.

### Ledger

A collection of data that keeps track of value assigned to individuals.

### Transaction

The data that represents the act of transferring value.

### Decentralization

A notion of a computer system operating through interaction of independent
nodes. In case of maintaining a shared data collection such as a ledger, a
consensus is required for consistency and reliability of data.

### Consensus Algorithm

A way for a decentralized system to reach a consistent view on shared
collections of data. Cardano SL uses the [Ouroboros Consensus
Algorithm](/cardano/proof-of-stake/), which is an algorithm based on
Proof of Stake.

### Proof of Stake

To generate data in a decentralized environment, election of a temporary
authority is required. This temporary authority shall tell which data should
be included into the shared collection. In the case of cryptocurrencies,
the data included is _transactions_. A group of transactions is called
a _block_, and a collection of the blocks the ledger can be derived from is
called a _blockchain_.

An important idea of "Proof of Stake" is that the more value one has, the
more chances one has to maintain the ledger (i.e. to be able to produce
a new block and add it to the blockchain).

For example, the user _Alice_ has some money in her wallet, let's say
`12` units, and the user _Bob_ has `10` units in his wallet. Both Alice' wallet
and Bob's wallet can be chosen to add a new block to the blockchain
(strictly speaking, a new block is added by a node, not by a wallet).
But the _probability_ of actually choosing the particular node
is determined by the _percentage_ of the total value in the system this node
owns. By this percentage we mean "all the value held by wallets on the particular
node divided by the total value in the system". This relative value is called
_stake_, and the node chosen to produce a new block is called a_stakeholder_
(see [Follow the Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi)).

### Node

Computer program that participates in a decentralized protocol system.

## Protocol Basics

### Slot

A small period of time that is significantly larger than the expected difference
in clocks on different nodes.

### Epoch

A bigger period of time for which we know in advance who will have the right
to generate a block in each slot.

### Follow The Satoshi

A mechanism whereby stakeholders are selected at random to forge a new block in
the blockchain, with a proportional chance to get elected depending on their
amount of stake in the protocol.

### Slot Leader

A slot leader is such a node which elected to have a right to create a block in the current slot.

### Leader Election

A process of picking who will generate blocks during the next epoch. Leaders are
elected with a probability proportional to their stake (see
[Proof of Stake](#proof-of-stake), [Follow the Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi)).
