---
layout: default
title: Glossary
permalink: /glossary/
group: base
anchors:
  Core Concepts: core-concepts
  Protocol Basics: protocol-basics
---

[//]: # (Reviewed at 60033350e60408fc79f202491e6985b3b47acd90)

# Glossary

Glossary of terms related to Cardano SL.

## Core Concepts

### Cryptocurrency

A computer system which uses cryptographic protocols to generate a ledger.

### Cardano SL

A hybrid decentralized cryptocurrency.

### Ledger

A collection of data that keeps track of value assigned to individuals.

### Transaction

The data that represents the act of transferring value.

### Decentralization

A notion of a computer system operating through interaction of independent
nodes. In case of maintaining a shared data collection such as a ledger, a
consensus is required for consistency and reliability of data.

### Consensus Algorithm

A way for a decentralized system to reach a consistent view on shared
collections of data. Cardano SL uses the [Ouroboros Consensus
Algorithm](/cardano/proof-of-stake/), which is an algorithm based on Proof of
Stake.

### Proof of Stake

To generate data in a decentralized environment, election of a temporary
authority is required. This temporary authority shall tell which data should be
included into the shared collection. In the case of cryptocurrencies, the data
included is *transactions*. A group of transactions is called a *block*, and a
collection of the blocks the ledger can be derived from is called a
*blockchain*.

An important idea of “Proof of Stake” is that the more value one has, the more
chances one has to maintain the ledger (i.e. to be able to produce a new block
and add it to the blockchain).

For example, the user *Alice* has some money in her wallet, let’s say `12`
units, and the user *Bob* has `10` units in his wallet. Both Alice’ wallet and
Bob’s wallet can be chosen to add a new block to the blockchain (strictly
speaking, a new block is added by a node, not by a wallet). But the
*probability* of actually choosing the particular node is determined by the
*percentage* of the total value in the system this node owns. By this percentage
we mean “all the value held by wallets on the particular node divided by the
total value in the system”. This relative value is called *stake*, and the node
chosen to produce a new block is called a\_stakeholder\_ (see [Follow the
Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi)).

### Node

Computer program that participates in a decentralized protocol system.

## Protocol Basics

### Slot

A small period of time that is significantly larger than the expected difference
in clocks on different nodes.

### Epoch

A bigger period of time for which we know in advance who will have the right to
generate a block in each slot.

### Follow The Satoshi

A mechanism whereby stakeholders are selected at random to forge a new block in
the blockchain, with a proportional chance to get elected depending on their
amount of stake in the protocol.

### Leader Selection

A process of picking who will generate blocks during the next epoch. Leaders are
selected with a probability proportional to their stake (see [Proof of
Stake](#proof-of-stake), [Follow the Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi)).
