---
layout: default
title: Differences Between the Paper and the Implementation
permalink: /cardano/differences/
group: cardano
visible: true
---
[//]: # (Reviewed at 86f679863c67c2aaf23c37cf2c23b9101fd1c77d)

# Differences Between Paper and Implementation

This document is a work-in-progress. The goal of this document is to enumerate
all the ways in which CSL implementation differs from the specifications
presented in the paper.

## Time, Slots, and Synchrony

In a basic model of *Ouroboros* time is divided into discrete units called
*slots*. However, there are no details on how to obtain current time securely
and with enough precision.

In *cardano-sl* current time is obtained by querying a predefined set of NTP
servers.

## Coin Tossing and Verifiable Secret Sharing

As *Ouroboros* paper suggests, a VSS scheme by Schoenmakers is used in
*cardano-sl*. One of the challenges while using a VSS scheme is associating the
public key used for signing with the public key used for VSS scheme
(`VssPublicKey`). This is solved by introducing `VssCertificate`s. This
certificate is a signature given by signing key for a pair consisting of
`VssPublicKey` and the epoch until which this certificate is valid. Initially,
all stakeholders with stake enough for participation in randomness generation
have certificates. When a new stakeholder with enough stake appears or when an
existing certificate expires, a new certificate should be generated and
submitted to the network. `VssCertificate`s are stored in blocks.

## Block Generation Time

In *Ouroboros* paper, they do not state explicitly when a slot leader should
generate a new block and send it to the network: it can be done in the beginning
of a slot, in the end of a slot, in the middle of a slot, etc. In `cardano-sl`
there is a special constant (`networkDiameter`) which approximates maximal time
necessary to broadcast a block to all nodes in the network. A block is generated
and announced `networkDiameter` seconds before the end of a slot.

## Stake Delegation

Delegation scheme, as described in paper, doesn’t explicitly state whether proxy
signing certificates should be stored within the blockchain (though there is a
suggestion to store the revocation list in the blockchain). Without storing
proxy signing certificates in the blockchain it’s barely possible to consider
delegated stake in checking eligibility threshold. On the other hand, if all
certificates are stored in the blockchain, it may lead to a blockchain bloat
when a big portion of blocks will be occupied by proxy certificates. Submitting
a certificate is free, so adversary can generate as many certificates as she
wants.

There are two types of delegation in `cardano-sl`: heavyweight and lightweight.
There is a threshold on stake that one has to posses in order to participate in
heavyweight delegation. Proxy signing certificates from heavyweight delegation
are stored within the blockchain. On the contrary, lightweight delegation is
available for everybody, but certificates are not stored within the blockchain
and aren’t considered when checking eligibility threshold. As paper suggests,
*delegation-by-proxy* scheme is used.

# Modified Things

## Leader Selection Process

In *Ouroboros* Leader Selection Process is described as flipping a
`(1 - p₁) … (1 - pⱼ₋₁) pⱼ`-biased coin to see whether `j`-th stakeholder is
selected as leader of given slot. Here `pⱼ` is probability of selecting `j`-th
stakeholder.

In `cardano-sl` it is implemented in a slightly different way.

## Commitments, openings, shares sending

Time of sending is randomized within ε.

## Multishares

In *Ouroboros* each stakeholder is presented as exactly one participant of the
underlying VSS scheme. However, it’s natural that a stakeholder with more stake
is more important than a stakeholder with less stake with regards to secret
sharing. For instance, if three honest stakeholders control 60% of stake in
total (each of them controls 20%) and there are 40 adversary stakeholders each
having 1% of stake, then adversary has full control over secret sharing.

To overcome this problem, in *cardano-sl* each stakeholder is allowed to send
number of commitment shares proportional to their stake. So each node must
decrypt each encrypted share of commitment and send all these decrypted shares
during *Reveal phase*.

## Randomness Generation Failure

*Ouroboros* doesn’t cover the situation when commitments can’t be recovered.
However, practical implementation should account for such scenarios.
*cardano-sl* implementation uses a seed consisting of all zeroes if there no
commitments could be recovered.

# Added Features

## Update System

See the article on [update system](/cardano/update-mechanism/).

## Security of P2P

See the article on [P2P implementation and hardening](/protocols/p2p/).

# Missing Things

The sections on *Input Endorsers* and *Incentive Structure* aren’t implemented
yet. Those sections are to be implemented together with the pending research on
Side-chains and released within the Side-chains release.
