---
layout: default
title: Ouroboros Proof of Stake Algorithm
permalink: /cardano/proof-of-stake/
group: cardano
visible: true
---
[//]: # (Reviewed at 403cea2d897aba95163b709bd13c35d343116f3f)

# Ouroboros Proof of Stake Algorithm

Ouroboros Proof of Stake Algorithm is the most important part of protocol, the
way that nodes reach consensus about the state of ledger.

Ouroboros is unique as it is the first blockchain protocol based on proof of
stake that is scientifically proved to be secure.

## Why Proof of Stake?

The most important thing about picking proof of stake algorithm over proof of
work which is adopted by Bitcoin is the energy consumption considerations.
Running the Bitcoin protocol is a tremendously expensive endeavor. It is
estimated that 3.8 American Households can be powered for a day by the energy
spent to generate one Bitcoin transaction. These energy requirements for running
the Bitcoin protocol only grow as more and more Bitcoin miners sink money into
mining, and the difficulty of the problems that their computers (mining rigs)
are cracking increases. This is why researchers did their best to investigate
alternative ways to reach consensus — such as using the so-called BFT (Byzantine
Fault Tolerant) consensus algorithms and Proof of Stake algorithms. The first
significant work on Proof of Stake was conducted by the team of the Nxt
cryptocurrency, but their protocol had significant flaws and no formal
verification.

## What is Proof of Stake?

In this section we explain what “Proof” and “Stake” mean, and then we put it all
together, explaining what “Proof of Stake” means.

### Proof

“Proof” part of Proof of Stake is about having evidence that blocks of
transactions are legitimate.

### Stake

“Stake” means “the relative value held by addresses on the node”. When we say
“relative value”, we mean “all value held by wallets on a particular node
divided by total value in the system”.

## Proof of Stake

Rather than saying that miners are pouring money into mining rigs running the
protocol, in order to participate in running the protocol in Proof of Stake
environment, we say that slot leaders generate blocks for the blockchain. Anyone
can become a slot leader if the coin selection algorithm would select a coin
they own. We say that this blockchain is self-referential, which means that
maintaining the blockchain depends on the network participants themselves and on
the network state. Nothing except for the network state and network participants
being online matters for the sake of Proof of Stake.

## Follow the Satoshi

Let’s elaborate a little bit on how a slot leader gets selected. The smallest,
atomic piece of value is called a “coin”. In Bitcoin, atomic piece is called
“Satoshi”, honoring the creator of Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto. Fundamentally, we
can say that the ledger produces distribution of coins. Follow the Satoshi is an
algorithm that verifiably picks a coin, provided randomness. When your coin gets
selected, you become a slot leader and can listen to transactions announced by
others, make a block of those transactions, sign it with your secret key and
publish it to the network. Of course, you don’t have to do it manually, your
node will take care of everything.

## Multi Party Computation

The matter of fueling Follow the Satoshi with randomness is another problem in
itself. We’re using Multi Party Computation approach when select nodes provide
so called “commitments” and then those get “revealed”, producing a random value
generated independently by participants of the network.

[//]: # (TODO PVSS)
